<h1 align="center">An Activity Recognition System for Taking Medicine Using In-The-Wild Data to Promote Medication Adherence</h1>
<p align="center">
    <a href="https://github.com/joshcherian42"><strong>Josh Cherian*</strong></a>
    ·
    <a href="https://github.com/sjray32"><strong>Samantha Ray*</strong></a>
    ·
    <a href="https://srltamu.com/"><strong>Tracy Hammond</strong></a>
</p>
<div align="center">* Both authors contributed equally to this research</div>
<h2></h2>

This code was used to produce the results in <a href="https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3397481.3450673"><strong>An Activity Recognition System for Taking Medicine Using In-The-Wild Data to Promote Medication Adherence</strong></a> which was published at IUI '21. This work presents a machine learning pipeline capable of identifying when individuals take medication in an unconstrained, real-world environment.

For this work we used accelerometer data collected Polar M600 smartwatches worn on both wrists by individuals over the course of a day. Collected data was segmented into 1-second windows with a 75% overlap; 106 features were extracted from these windows and used as inputs into machine learning classifiers. Our pipeline uses a modified form of the Bagging ensemble learning method, in which the class imbalance seen by the baseline classifiers was controlled. Subsequently, we use the prediction probabilities generated by this model in a secondary classifier, testing classification, ranking, and similarity metrics. We evaluated our proposed pipeline in user-specific, user-dependent, and user-adaptive fashions. We found that when evaluating our pipeline in a user-adaptive fashion, using an SVM classifier on top of Controlled Bagging allowed us to recognize when individuals took medication with an <strong>F-measure of 0.77</strong>.

## BibTeX

```bibtex
@inproceedings{cherian2021activity,
    author = {Cherian, Josh and Ray, Samantha and Hammond, Tracy},
    title = {An Activity Recognition System for Taking Medicine Using In-The-Wild Data to Promote Medication Adherence},
    year = {2021},
    isbn = {9781450380171},
    publisher = {Association for Computing Machinery},
    address = {New York, NY, USA},
    url = {https://doi.org/10.1145/3397481.3450673},
    doi = {10.1145/3397481.3450673},
    abstract = {Nearly half of people prescribed medication to treat chronic or short-term conditions do not take their medicine as prescribed. This leads to worse treatment outcomes, higher hospital admission rates, increased healthcare costs, and increased morbidity and mortality rates. While some instances of medication non-adherence are a result of problems with the treatment plan or barriers caused by the health care provider, many are instances caused by patient-related factors such as forgetting, running out of medication, and not understanding the required dosages. This presents a clear need for patient-centered systems that can reliably increase medication adherence. To that end, in this work we describe an activity recognition system capable of recognizing when individuals take medication in an unconstrained, real-world environment. Our methodology uses a modified version of the Bagging ensemble method to suit unbalanced data and a classifier trained on the prediction probabilities of the Bagging classifier to identify when individuals took medication during a full-day study. Using this methodology we are able to recognize when individuals took medication with an F-measure of 0.77. Our system is a first step towards developing personal health interfaces that are capable of providing personalized medication adherence interventions.},
    booktitle = {26th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces},
    pages = {575–584},
    numpages = {10},
    keywords = {ADLs, wearable technology, human activity recognition, medication adherence},
    location = {College Station, TX, USA},
    series = {IUI '21}
}
